Hi everyone, my name is Adam and I'm a 3rd year student in the Cartwright lab. We're a completely dry lab, so we don't do any pipetting or anything like that and our data comes from public databases or from our collaborators. So to all the recruits out there, know that there are labs like us out there if you ever get tired of pipetting. Also if you laugh at my jokes, I'll do what I can to make sure you get in. Anyway, today I'll be talking about my project where I genotyped this tree 24 different times. You may say "Adam, why would you do something like that? It's just one tree, it has just one genotype." And you'd be right, for the most part. However, we all know that in biology the rules are made to be broken, and when those rules are broken is when the interesting biology happens. In actuality, this tree has many different genotypes that are slightly different from one another because of somatic mutations that occur when the tree grows, just like they do as you and I develop.
Mostly it's the fault of this guy here, DNA polymerase, which--like me--is a massive screw-up. Just kidding, it's actually fairly accurate--but not completely! Even after all the error checking and mutation repair pathways that are activated and such, there's a mutation rate of about 10^-9 substitutions per site per division. As a rule of thumb, you can estimate that every cell division there will be one mutation in the genome. That's why mammals have a seperated germline--you can have mutations in your cells that are constantly renewing themselves, but those mutations won't show up in your offspring. This polymerase here is actually DNA polymerase beta, which is involved mostly in base excision repair. However, it's the most well studied polymerase and that's why I have a picture of it. The main polymerase responsible for replication is DNA polymerase delta. But either way, most of these DNA polymerases have a similar structure, and people kind of compare it to a baseball glove or similar. It's a bit like your hand, where the DNA kind of wraps around your palm. So as the polymerase copies DNA, it kind of crosses the palm and that's how it can tell if it's made a mistake and there's a mismatch, at which point it can excise the incorrect base and put the right one in.
So polymerases are making mistakes every cell division, and at the same time, plants are growing directionally. Here's a short summary of some plant physiology that I just learned about last week. The site where the plant is growing is called the meristem. There are many meristems in a plant, on the main shoot and in the roots. I'll be talking only about the apical meristem that is on the shoots, since I'm not looking at plant roots and only at branches. So here's the apical meristem, the stem cells are in blue and they sit in what's called the Stem Cell Niche, here PZ is the proliferation zone, and DZ is the differentiation zone. So essentially what happens when the meristem gets signals to differentiate, they divide to keep the number of stem cells approximately constant, and the daughter cells start moving out to the proliferation zone and further into the differentiation zone where they start to turn into the type of cell the plant needs it to be. One of the crazy things about plants is that the stem cells in the meristem can turn into any type of cell, which is different from animals where you get specialized stem cells that are limited in the tissues they can form. Essentially, in plants, all their stem cells are embryonic stem cells. So you can imagine as this tree is growing up and getting taller, somatic mutations are accumulating every cell division. That means that we should be able to check different points around the tree and we'll be able to see where those mutations occurred and in general how frequently they occur. This is a lot like what evolutionary biologists do when they create phylogenetic trees--tracking the genetic history of some population, but instead we're interested in tracking the genetic history of this single individual.
So as I just said, these meristem stem cells can turn into any organ the tree needs, and that includes reproductive organs. What this means is any mutations that occur in the meristem as the tree is growing will occur in the gametes of the plant, even before considering mutations that occur during meiosis and recombination. That's a huge difference between plants and animals. At the same time that somatic mutations are passed to offspring, in a single plant you might get selection such that one branch of a tree is more fit and has higher fecundity than another branch of a tree. And people have been asking whether this affects the evolution of plants for a long time--this is a paper written in 1986 asking the question: do plants evolve differently? Kind of the key quote here is this: "The relative importance of somatic and gametic mutations in plants cannot be assessed until the necessary measurements are made. "The necessary measurements". So what we've set out to do in this project is go out and actually collect those measurements so we can start getting an idea of what's going on and start getting an answer to this question. Here, too, I've just listed a few things that make plants really weird such that you might think that somatic mutations affect their evolution. Some people argue about whether plants actually do have a segregated germline because of how detrimental it could be for somatic mutations to be passed to offspring. Another weird thing some plants do is dedifferentiate--in a lot of plants you can get dedifferentiation of tissues to form meristems, which can affect how the population evolves. At the same time, in plants that reproduce primarily by selfing, somatic mutations will be good for generating variation. This subject got a lot of attention recently because a group found a really high somatic mutation rate in arabadopsis that they attributed to this, and so of course they immediately went on to generalize their finding in a lab-strain of a weed species to every single plant on Earth. And in a similar vein to the intraorganismal selection, people have been discussing a lot the possibility of a mutational stress response, whereby organisms under many different kinds of stress start to enhance their mutation rate in an attempt to avoid the stress, which is a pretty controversial topic. In summary, getting this data will help to contribute to a lot of different debates that are happening.
So if this idea has been around for 50 years or so, why hasn't anyone done anything about it? And the answer to that is that somatic mutations are really hard to detect. They occur very infrequently, so you need a genome-wide approach, but you also have to have a high level of accuracy because sequencing errors are so common in comparison. Just to get an idea, an average mutation rate may be 10^-9 per generation but the average sequencing error rate is about 10^-2, so it's not really an exaggeration to say that any changes you see are about a million times more likely to be an error than a mutation. These errors are introduced all throughout the sequencing process, including during PCR. Here's a graph of different polymerases, with Taq having an error rate of around 10^-4. If you start running low on reagents so not every molecule is getting amplified in your PCR cycle, this becomes a big problem because just by chance you can end up amplifying your errors, and when these get sequenced an error that occurred just one time in an early cycle can seem like a really good signal of a mutation. On this graph here we just have a bunch of different polymerases, and this group estimated their error rates and compared them. They found this Q5 polymerase to be the best, so do with that what you will.
So why care about somatic mutations themselves? Obviously a big one is cancer, which is caused by somatic mutations. So understanding the causes and the spread of somatic mutations is really important for preventing the disease. Developmental biologists and some immunologists are interested in understanding the relationships between various cells, and if we can use somatic mutations to determine those relationships that would be a good way to do that. Agriculture is another important reason, a lot of commercially important crops are the result of a somatic mutation on one branch of a tree. So here is a picture of a nectarine, which is just a peach that had a mutation on one branch and that was expanded and bred. And finally we already talked a lot about the evolutionary reasons you'd want to think about somatic mutations in plants. So hopefully all this has convinced you that genotyping a tree multiple times to see if the genetic structure matches the physical structure is feasible and worthwhile.
That brings us to our goals, which I've distilled into two points here: is it even possible to get accurate enough genotypes to reconstruct the tree? And once we do that, is there anything interesting we notice about the mutation rates? Are they incredibly high? Are they lower than we expect?
The first thing we've got to do is pick the individual we're going to sequence. And this is a pretty interesting one that we've decided on; it's been written about before as a genetic mosaic, so that's good for us. Essentially, the left side of this tree has some genotype that gives it some protection against predation from the beetles that eat it. So when they come through, you'll see they've eaten the right side of the tree but ignore the left. This is a pretty good fit for what we're doing because it means there's a priori evidence that there will actually be a significant change in genotype across the tree that we can detect. It also gives us a good chance of seeing intra-organismal selection at work and hypermutation that people have predicted exist.
What we've done is sampled 8 branches from the tree and 3 leaves from each of those branches, which we use as biological replicates. Unfortunately this species of tree doesn't have a reference genome, so we'll just try using the genome of a close relative and see what happens. So after we do the alignment and the variant calling, we can use our replicates to get rid of any sequencing errors that may be interfering with the genotyper.
Here's a picture of the alignment so you can kind of visualize this process; we've aligned the reads to the reference up here and you can see how there are some sites that are clearly different from the reference, you can see how there are a few errors that have popped up, and you can see some sites that look like heterozygotes. So what's essentially happening is we go through the alignment site by site and apply a statistical model to make a decision about the genotype of the sample accounting for the errors. But you can really see how errors can affect the process--like is this site heterozygous? Or is it just that these are errors? The model will figure out which is more likely and tell you.
Once we get the genotypes, I constructed this tree, which is almost right. As you can see here, in the real tree samples 7 and 6 are closer together than 8, where in the genotyped tree 7 and 8 are closer. So this tells me that there's definitely a signal that we're getting, we just need to refine our process.
This here is a histogram of the mapping quality scores of our alignment. On the x-axis here is the quality score, with higher being better, and the number of reads with that quality on the Y-axis. When you construct the alignment, the aligner gives a score to the alignment of each read, essentially quantifying how confident it is that the read should go there and not anywhere else. As you can see by this huge bar on the left here, what this is telling us is that most of our reads aren't mapping, which makes sense because we're mapping to a reference of a different species.
So maybe we could use a reference-free method instead. So we tried it, and here are those results. Essentially, the method uses a bunch of fancy algortihms to align each of your reads against each other to find the spots where your samples differ, rather than doing a full alignment to a reference. It does a similarly-OK-job, again reinforcing that we have some signal, but still some problems getting accurate genotypes, particularly in that segment of the tree.
We don't want to have to go through the entire process of assembling a whole new genome because we only have short reads and that's a lot of work that a lot of people really don't appreciate all the work that goes into making a really good reference genome. But since we have a starting point, it's possible that we could use the reference we have and progressively make it better. So we aligned the reads to the reference, used that to call a new consensus reference, and repeated that a few times.
This plot is again like the other one with quality score on the x axis and number of reads on the Y axis. Here, the green is the old alignment, and the orange is our improved alignment. You can see that the number of reads that don't map has gone down a bit, and the number of reads that map with the highest score goes up a bit. So it looks like our new reference is improved a bit, and hopefully this will translate to better genotypes.
Finally, we also decided to filter out variants that are in low-quality alignment regions. Essentially, these are regions where there's evidence of an alignment error or it's just a genomic region where the aligner is going to have a hard time, like repetitive regions and around indels. Excessive depth or heterozygosity in a region is also a bad sign, likely caused by the collapse of paralogs and other regions that are similar to each other.
When we do this, we get a tree that still isn't 100% right, but I'm a lot happier with. It gets the major tip relationships right, but has trouble resolving these interior nodes and puts a polytomy. So this tells us that our variants are reasonably accurate enough to make some inferences about the mutation rate.
And so we do. Across the tree we have 143 mutations,,, so on and so forth
And with that I would like to thank everyone for their attention, thanks to my advisor, my collaborator at ANU, everyone in the Cartwright lab, and the NIH and NSF for funding.



